---
layout: post
title: "Telescope Optics & Design"
author: "Landon"
tags:
- engineering
---

After seeing this photo of the Large Magellanic Cloud that made the rounds on the internet a couple of months ago, I proposed to Bayley that we should visit one of the large-scale project ideas I'd previously had - a remotely operated telescope. I currently reside in NYC and will for the foreseeable future, so a remotely operated telescope is really the only way to own and operate a telescope with any degree of efficiency. 

Bayley and I are both fairly knowledgeable about optics and sensors, but had never done real calculations required to put together a professional optics system. For telescopes, there's also the added question of how to guide your optical system, since exposures are quite long, and the Earth's rotation leads to stars apparently moving across the sky. Without counteracting this movement, pictures will be ruined by motion blur in seconds (or less, depending on the effective resolution of your optical system). This post will summarize our learnings and should provide a practical reference to designing a telescope between roughly $1,000 and $20,000. Shy of $1,000, just get a mount, basically any halfway decent lens, and whatever camera you already have. Above $20k, you probably already know what you're doing and are making considerations for reasons other than raw performance. This roughly equates to telescopes from the 8" to 14" range of apertures.

Setting aside the optics of the telescope for a second, we'll discuss the sensor. Fundamentally, a sensor is a device which has an array of pixels, and each pixel converts photons to electrons, stores them in a capacitor (electron well), and then reads the number of electrons store in that capacitor on readout. There are a lot of parameters here, but for telescope operation, the most important ones are quantum efficiency and dark current, and, to a somewhat lesser extent, well depth and readout noise. The sensor size and pixel pitch are important to match to your optics, but are themselves not particularly important. We'll discuss matching them to the optics when the optics themselves are discussed.

Breaking down each of these specs one by one, we'll first cover quantum efficiency. Quantum efficiency, or QE, is the percent of photons which are converted to electrons. With a QE of 1.00, each photon is perfectly converted to a single electron. There are two main types of sensor technologies, CCD and CMOS. We won't worry about the differences in operation, but suffice to say most professional astrophotography cameras are CCD, and most other cameras in the world are CMOS. CMOS is an almost strictly superior technology except that there are not yet many cooled, large area, CMOS sensors available. The primary difference between the two is QE, where CCD's rarely crack 0.8 at best, and CMOS sensors frequently exceed 0.9. Since QE is inversely proportional to exposure time (a QE of 1.00 will require half the exposure time of a QE of 0.5, all else equal), CMOS has a clear edge here.

Typically, QE is reported as a spectrum, with peak QE highlighted - this is because sensors have different efficiencies at different wavelengths of light. This is further compounded for color sensors, which have a Bayer array over the sensor. These sensors typically have individual QE spectra for each filter. This makes calculating overall QE a bit tricky, since there are 25% red, 25% blue, and 50% green pixels. The most useful wavelengths for astrophotography are related to the emissions spectra of light elements, with the primary emission line typically hydrogen alpha, at around 656nm. This normally falls squarely in the middle of the red pixel range, which means any color sensor is probably less than half as sensitive as any mono sensor, all else being about equal (there are emission lines that fall into green and blue pixel bins as well, such as <insert example here>).

Moving along to the second of the two critical specs is dark current, or dark noise. As mentioned, sensors convert photons to electrons and store them in a capacitor. This capacitor can fill from other stray sources of electrons too though, even when no photon-electrons are being added, hence "dark current". This is typically reported in electrons per second. We'll get into real-world illumination values later, but suffice to say, a dark current of over 1 is not great, over 5 is bad, and over 10 is nearly unusable. Dark currents under 0.5 are ideal. This is where astrophotography-specific cameras typically shine far better than standard cameras, because they typically have a subambient cooling system built in - dark current is highly correlated with temperature, and a sensor cooled to 40C or even 100C below ambient will perform much, much better than a sensor at/above ambient temperature. Typically, CCD's will have 5-20 e-/s of dark current, but cooled to -20C, they fall to 0.1 e-/s or better. Very modern CMOS sensors start out at about 1-5 e-/s and fall to a similar range once cooled. Unfortunately, finding cooled CMOS sensors is very difficult - there are a few specially converted from DSLR's, and a few astrophotography-specific cameras. Unfortunately, there are, to my knowledge, no cooled full frame or larger mono sensors. There is one full frame cooled color CMOS astro camera, which costs about $3.5k, and one micro 4/3 cooled mono CMOS camera, which costs $1k.

The importance of having a low dark current comes into play when you consider what's actually happening when you take a picture of a particularly dark section of sky. You might receive a photon flux of just a few photons per second, which, if you have a dark current of also a few electrons per second, means your signal to noise ratio is just 1:1. This can be compensated for by subtracting "dark" frames, where the telescope is specifically obstructed and an image of pure darkness is made, but this is a compensation at best, and best images will always result from starting from a better SNR.

Between QE and dark current, you can get a sense of how many photons you'll have to gather to get a decent photo. Working with a desired electron count of 1k (10 bit dynamic range),...blegh dunno what to do with this section

Well depth and readout noise refer to the capacitor side of the equation - well depth is the number of electrons the capacitor can hold, and readout noise is the noise associated with reading the number of electrons in the well. Typically well depth is directly correlated with pixel size, and readout noise is directly correlated with date of manufacture and price. A well depth of 20k is typical (14-15 stops of dynamic range), with well depths up to 100k (18-19 stops of dynamic range) for particularly fat-pixeled cameras. With a higher well depth, the camera can take longer exposures without saturating the brightest pixels. It's always possible to take many more short exposures, working around the limitations of a low well depth, but pixel bias can make this problematic (eg, a pixel always reports 20 or 30 electrons too many). This _too_ can be worked around, by subtracting very short exposure frames, but again, starting with a high SNR and high dynamic range is always better than starting with a worse SNR and dynamic range.

Read noise is the amount of noise on the readout of the capacitor, typically in the 0.5 - 10 e- range. Most modern cameras should be capable of < 3 e- read noise. This also directly contributes to the SNR of your final image, but since there's less variance between cameras, other factors are typically more important to consider. This is not the case for normal cameras, where read noise can be the dominant factor in short exposures.

So, that's the basics of sensors: CMOS vs CCD, cooled vs uncooled, and color vs mono are some basic parameters that should always be visible, but if you can find reported specs for QE, dark current, well depth, and read noise, that's always better.

Now, on to telescopes! Well, the optics, anyway. Before we get going though, we need to talk about the 4 aberrations: coma, field curvature, spherical aberration, and blah

And finish this later